---
layout: post
title: Why (I) care about Darwin's Problem  
excerpt: I like the term Darwin's Problem as a way to refer to the problem of human language evolution. By echoing Chomsky's nomenclature (Humboldt's Problem, Plato's Problem, Descartes' Problem), the term makes it clear that this is all part of a family of question that constitute a research program harking back to Tinbergen's Four questions for ethology.
author: Cedric
tag: evolution
---

I like the term Darwin's Problem as a way to refer to the problem of human language evolution. By echoing Chomsky's nomenclature (Humboldt's Problem, Plato's Problem, Descartes' Problem), the term makes it clear that this is all part of a family of question that constitute a research program harking back to Tinbergen's Four questions for ethology.

Although other questions have occupied pride of place in linguistics, Darwin's Problem is my favorite, not only because (like so many others) I'd love to know how the modern human language faculty came to be, but because methodologically speaking it is the question that unambiguously makes the language sciences part of the biological sciences. Studying human language means different things to different people, and that's great. I got into linguistics not because of an inordinate love for language(s), but because of the promise (going all the way back to Descartes, and likely even earlier philosophers) that understanding this capacity we have to generate grammatical predictions about the world around us will tell us something deep about who we are. That's a humanities question alright, but everybody's guess is that the answer is ultimately rooted in biology; and this means, evolutionary biology. Chomsky's frequent point about his granddaughter, kittens and rocks (with only the first developing language) is precisely about Darwin's Problem: it compares creatures and points to the species-specific character of the trait in question. It's the quintessential question of what makes (made) us human.

Of all the Tinbergian questions on the agenda of the language sciences, Darwin's Problem is the most interdisciplinary one of all: it's inescapably, unambiguously interdisciplinary. You can't investigate it in the privacy of your linguistics office. That is unlike, say, the problem of what knowledge of language is. For the latter, linguists have (successfully) proceeded pretty much like philologists did in the past: analyzing (parts of) sentences, across languages. Familiar data, modulo the odd sentence construction. You can't (seriously) do this in the context of Darwin's Problem. I know people have tried: they have looked for "fossils" --- modern language constructions that linguistic theory would single out as "simpler"; essentially, relics of a pre-linguistic (proto-linguistic) system. Bickerton, Jackendoff, and, in a book-length format, Progovac advocated this approach. I have written about why I find this non-compelling. At the end of the day, these fossils are modern language constructions, and their proto-linguistic status rests on some speculation about what proto-language was. All of this done in the privacy of a linguistics office. That is very different from the approach pioneered by Simon Kirby: his iterated learning paradigm looks at language(-like) data (artificial grammars), and tests participants that have a modern language capacity, but the goal is to distill generic biases that drive the learning process. Unlike the language-fossil studies, this type of work can be readily exported to other domains, and indeed the iterated learning paradigm has been applied to non-language material (whistles, drawings, etc.). The language(-like) data is not essential to the iterated learning paradigm. But it is essential for the fossilized-construction studies. In the latter case philologists/traditional grammarians feel at home. In the former, they don't.

The iterated language paradigm is just one of the many ways in which Darwin's Problem has become empirically tractable, "experimentable" in the lab. Progress in genetics offer other approaches. Refined methods in comparative psychology, yet others. All of these opportunities are open to faculty-of-language scientists (Faculty-of-linguists?). But they won't attract the linguists, only at ease amidst (parts of) sentences. That's the great value of thinking about Darwin's Problem: it forces you to make a choice: which draws you more: the nature of language, or the nature of cognition? Do you take language to be the ultimate goal, or the means to get there? If you have to make constructive comparisons with species that don't have language, ...

Darwin's Problem is also great at forcing linguists to be specific about what they take to be what Gallistel called "the foundational abstractions". Along with Krakauer and colleagues, I agree that the cognitive descriptions of behavior have a lot to contribute to work in other disciplines. But we can't just ask the folks across the border to read our textbooks. The textbooks train for a particular discipline. We must get these texts down to basics; stick to the essentials. Ideally, frame these in generic terms; otherwise, they won't get past customs. Such a mapping problem, as David Poeppel has called it.  It i s indeed of utmost importance. For language, I side with Tecumseh Fitch and Juan Uriagereka, and think that some of the earliest descriptions of linguistic computations, such as some of those found in the first chapters of Howard Lasnik's Syntactic Structures revisited, constitute a rock-solid foundation. Notice that in those early studies, actual (parts of) sentences played no role. It was all algebraic: terminal symbols, non-terminal symbols, transformations, monostrings, etc. Ideal for fruitful comparisons with species that don't manipulate (parts of) sentences.

Of course, some might say this is not linguistics. That's fine. Different people are entitled to different opinions about language. What's clear in the context of Darwin's Problem is that language is not a thing. It's many things put together: it's a mosaic, a patchwork, a complex system -- a conjunction of many parts that have come together in the course of evolution. Linguists would call it a compound. Interestingly, linguists distinguish between two types of compound. There are compounds like handbag, where one of the parts is clearly dominant (a handbag is a bag, not hand). Such compounds are called endocentric. There are other compounds, like football (the game), that are called exocentric, where all the parts of equally important. In light of Hauser, Chomsky's and Fitch's 2002 article in Science, one could say that linguists tend to think of the human faculty of language as an endocentric compound. Sure, it consists of many parts, but some parts are more important than others. They would constitute the core, and the rest would be "externalized" to the periphery. The bet here is that the core is species-unique. I think this renders cross-species comparison particularly difficult. It's too easy to turn the core of the compound as a mountain that is too tall to climb for other species. It leads to a kind of exceptional nativism -- something irreducibly unique about human language. Comparative psychology becomes necessarily contrastive. The alternative, which I favor, is one that takes the language faculty to be akin to an exocentric compounds: all parts are needed to make a unique whole, but none of the parts, on their own, are unique. As such, it's just a matter of identifying them, across cognitive domains, scattered among organisms. I think that's the only way to climb mount improbable.

At the end of the day, Darwin's Problem is a question that opens the field (of language sciences) like no other I know of. It's the only one that has made me revise my understanding of language based on progress in other fields; progress that seems so fundamental that it requires a shift of perspective in order to be assimilated (the FOXP2 literature being a prime example). It's the only one that expanded my data set (filling it with data of different kinds, from different species, from birds to bats to baboons). It's the only question that has left me without any excuse for not doing biology.


### Works cited:

Bickerton, D. (1992). *Language and Species (Reprint edition).* Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N., & Fitch, W. T. (2002). The faculty of language: what is it, who has it, and how did it evolve? *Science* (New York, N.Y.), 298(5598), 1569–1579. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.298.5598.1569

Jackendoff, R. (2003). *Foundations of Language: Brain, Meaning, Grammar, Evolution.* Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.

Krakauer, J. W., Ghazanfar, A. A., Gomez-Marin, A., MacIver, M. A., & Poeppel, D. (2017). Neuroscience Needs Behavior: Correcting a Reductionist Bias. *Neuron*, 93(3), 480–490. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2016.12.041

Lees, R. B. (1957). Review of Review of Syntactic Structures, by N. Chomsky. *Language*, 33(3), 375–408. https://doi.org/10.2307/411160

Parker, F. (2001). Syntactic Structures Revisited: Contemporary Lectures on Classic Transformational Theory. *Journal of English Linguistics*, 29(2), 179–182. https://doi.org/10.1177/00754240122005297

Piattelli-Palmarini, M., Uriagereka, J., & Salaburu, P. (2010). *Of Minds and Language: A Dialogue with Noam Chomsky in the Basque Country.* Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.

Progovac, L. (2015). *Evolutionary Syntax*. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.

