### What do we mean by "interdisciplinary"?

"Interdisciplinary research on human cognition" has a ring to it, people write it, people read it, it works. I have come to accept it, I don't question it every time I read it. But when it comes to doing research myself, I painfully feel the ambiguity of this concept every single day. I have realised that it can mean many different things. Working between disciplines can mean between two or between four disciplines, and it could be related things that seamlessly merge with each other, and it could be stuff that is mind-blowinglingy hard to reconcile. 

Take psychology and neuroscience: it works. The questions they are interested in overlap heavily, and the methods they use are easily combined. They seem complementary, in fact. But take linguistics and biology on the other hand - I still haven't seen any work that truly connects them (people might disagree), no matter what people keep saying (hehe). And take Tinbergen literally, and try to work on all his levels of analysis at the same time, and you will end up with far more than two disciplines. 

But there is another ambiguous aspect to the idea of interdisciplinarity, which is that some people suggest to collaborate between disciplines, but with experts from each field, while other people (like me) try to become generalists, who are not experts, but at least proficient in several fields. As you can imagine, this kind of thing has consequences. And not everybody thinks it's a good idea. 

In an academic context people always try to seem as smart as possible, and they show off their knowledge, and they work hard to have to say "I have no idea" as little as possible. Working between disciplines and saying goodbye to being an expert means having to take on a different approach. It's not easy to say "I don't know", "this stuff doesn't apply to me", and "yes, I did a B.A.". It's uncomfortable to not conform to people's expectations like that. But it's absolutely necessary if you believe that being a generalist has any value. If you really want to do that, you have to embrace it and convince people of it, and you cannot to that if you deny what it means as soon as someone gives you a funny look.

But outside of the realm of the "What will people say?" problem, there are some very practical challenges to this approach that I have not really found a solution to yet. How much do I try to learn about other fields, where do I stop -- because I have to stop at some point. What kind of work can I do that is not just a mediocre version of what an expert could do? If there are no pre-established patterns to follow, you have to do a lot of thinking when it comes to designing your research procedure. Who will publish me? Who will employ me later, with a freaky profile like mine? 

With this sword of damocles of questions hanging over my head threateningly, I feel a constant temptation to slip out of the "interdisciplinary" and into a more "classical" thing. It's quite easy to tell yourself "I am going to develop an interdisciplinary hypothesis" and then a few months later realise that you are working on a very much not interdisciplinary question and you are trying to answer it in a very much mono-disciplinary way - because that is what most researchers do, and of course that makes a lot of sense, because it means you can rely on a huge body of previous work, especially with regard to methodology, that you can support your own study design with, it means your work will be clean, well defined, bullet-proof - exactly what we all want! 

Instead, what someone who tries to actually work between fields has to do is come up with kind of new ways to answer questions. Of course, I want my methodology to be just as sound as anybody elses. I want to know the limitations of what I do, and I want to understand what we can infer from the results, I want it to be replicable, if it involves data, or testable, if it remains theoretical. But in well-established disciplines, these things are taken care of if you make sure you stick to established protocols. When you are between fields, there is no protocol yet. 

Last but not least I am haunted by existential dread (like any PhD student, I assume). What kind of work is the interdisciplinary researcher supposed to do? What can she do that is better than what two experts who collaborate could not do? And is that what I am doing? Because that is the thing that would ultimately validate this approach, even if it brings a lot of messy things with it. We need to come up with something that a biologist and a linguist who sit down in a room together would not have come up with (or even worse, something that a group of biologists could have done by themselves). To be honest, I think that is fucking difficult. 